# ADR 6: Use pure functions, avoid hidden side effects

## Context

It is common in Object Oriented Programming to have methods that modify the instance that uses them. For example, adding an item to a set would directly modify it. This even can be beneficial for re-using memory and other optimisations. However, this implies that the exact behaviour of a function depends on some state of the machine that is external to the function itself.

On the other hand, Functional Programming prefers _pure functions_ where the functions are solely defined by their input-output relationship and no external state changes how it runs. For example, adding an item to a set would return a new, different, set with the item added; while the old set would remain unchanged.

Pure functions do not prevent changing a state, but the state has to be kept local to the code using it. This makes the side effects explicit and reduce the risk of unstable and hard to investigate behaviour due to a specific state.

Moreover, pure functions are easier to write unit tests for, since there is no need to set up the correct state before calling the function, and tear it down afterwards. It suffices to provide the wanted inputs and 
observe the output.

## Decision

We will use pure functions as much as possible. We may still use side effects where it makes sense, e.g. for performance optimisations.

We will keep properties in objects `private` and only accept changing them via selected methods that create new instances. This limits the risk of code modifying an instance of an object that might be shared elsewhere.

When getters expose mutable data structure (e.g. native `Array`), we will make sure to expose them as `ReadOnly` to avoid external mutation of instances.

## Status

Accepted.

## Consequences

The mix of classes with pure functions as methods can be a bit unsettling for new developers. Read more about it in the [API design](../../api.md#design) section. 
