# ADR 5: Don't depend on third party code to produce results

## Context

External dependencies and packages often offer great functionalities that can be leveraged to quickly scale and develop large applications. However, dependencies are not exempt from bugs and fixing them is often out of our power. The bug needs to be fixed upstream, and might not be prioritized by the external team, … Moreover, dependencies require frequent updates that are often conflicting.

## Decision

We will not use external dependencies and packages for anything that is business critical, namely producing the outcome of accessibility audits.

We may use external dependencies for tooling ("`devDependencies`"), for integrations with other frameworks, and for post-manipulation of the outcome (e.g. serialization, …) since none of these are business critical.

The transparency produced by owning all relevant code is required by Alfa's [second goal](../../../README.md#goals).

## Status

Accepted.

Exception: we use the `colorjs.io` library for manipulating CSS colors. This is due to 3 factors: (i) `colorjs.io` itself has no dependencies, thus the added footprint is small; (ii) albeit not an official W3C library, it is nonetheless maintained by the CSS Color specifications editors, thus ensuring quality and correctness; (iii) our own color manipulation code ended up being copied from the specifications, itself copied from `colorjs.io`, and this stopped scaling with CSS Colors levels 4 and 5. 

## Consequences

By rejecting external dependencies, we need to re-implement (and maintain) ourselves many basic functionalities.

At the same time, we only need to maintain what is actually used in Alfa and can focus on this API. Moreover, we can ensure that these implementations follow the rest of the coding standard in Alfa and further ADRs. 
