# ADR 8: Use `Option<T>` to model optional values

## Context

Many computations may return a value, or no value at all. Classical examples include finding an element in a collection, or finding the value associated to a key in a keyed collection. More domain specific examples include finding the cascaded value of a CSS property, the role or the accessible name of an element, …

ES traditionally model these with the use of either the `null` or `undefined` values. To prevent runtime errors, non-null checks must then be introduced in many place (type safety can still be ensured). The many non-null checks can often be alleviated by used of optional chaining (`?.`) and nullish coalescence (`??`). While these work well enough for methods chaining, they are not usable when chaining functions.

Functional Programming languages often have an `Option` type to represent these values.

## Decision

We will implement an `Option<T>` type and use it to model optional results. We will avoid the use of `null` or `undefined` to represent non-existent value as much as possible (they are still needed, for example, to represent optional parameters to a function since this is ES way of handling them). 

The `Option<T>` type will be implemented as a monad to allow easy chaining of operations on the contained value and remove the need from constantly checking whether it exists.

## Status

Accepted.

## Consequences

The `Option<T>` type provides better type safety and make it obvious in signatures that the value may be absent. 

The monadic implementation, and use of `map` and `flatMap` helpers makes the machinery of checking presence transparent to callers and offer a cleaner API.

The resulting code style is closer to Functional Programming languages, which may be unsettling for developers not used to them; but may also ease entry cost for developers used to them…
