<!-- Do not edit this file. It is automatically generated by API Documenter. -->

[Home](./index.md) &gt; [@siteimprove/alfa-rules](./alfa-rules.md) &gt; [experimentalRules](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.md)

## experimentalRules namespace

## Variables

<table><thead><tr><th>

Variable


</th><th>

Description


</th></tr></thead>
<tbody><tr><td>

[ER8](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.er8.md)


</td><td>


</td></tr>
<tr><td>

[ER87](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.er87.md)


</td><td>

This version of R87 ask questions whose subject is not the target of the rule. The context of the question is still the test target (the document), but the subjects can be various elements (the first focusable element, or its destination once it's been identified as a link). This needs changes in Dory, Nemo, and likely databases to be stored; this needs changes in the Page Report to be able to highlight an element different from the test target.


</td></tr>
<tr><td>

[R109](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.r109.md)


</td><td>

This rule always asks for the language of the page, and compares it with the `lang` attribute. This is not a nice experience for the end user and shouldn't be used until backend can automatically determine the answer.


</td></tr>
<tr><td>

[R114](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.r114.md)


</td><td>

This rule always asks Whether the `<title>` of the page is descriptive. This is not a nice experience for the end user and shouldn't be used until backend can automatically determine the answer.


</td></tr>
<tr><td>

[R115](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.r115.md)


</td><td>

This rule always asks Whether the heading is descriptive. This is not a nice experience for the end user and shouldn't be used until backend can automatically determine the answer.


</td></tr>
<tr><td>

[R117](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.r117.md)


</td><td>

This rule always asks whether the image accessible name is descriptive. This is not a nice experience for the end user and shouldn't be used until backend can automatically determine the answer.


</td></tr>
<tr><td>

[R82](./alfa-rules.experimentalrules.r82.md)


</td><td>

R82 ask questions whose subject is not the target of the rule. The context of the question is still the test target, but the subjects can be various other elements. This needs changes in Dory, Nemo, and likely databases to be stored; this needs changes in the Page Report to be able to highlight an element different from the test target.


</td></tr>
</tbody></table>
